[SYCL][Doc] Improvements design for program cache (#3119)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/KernelProgramCache.md

> 

Reviewer: Extra line

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

device code (big kernels or multiple kernels) may take significant time. The
kernels and programs are rebuild on every program restart. AOT compilation
can be used to avoid that but it ties application to specific backend runtime
version(s) and predefined HW configuration(s). As general solution it is
reasonable to have kernel/program cache which works between application
restarts (e.g. cache on disk for devices code build for specific HW/SW
configuration).

<a name="what-is-program">1</a>: Here "program" means an internal SYCL runtime
object corresponding to a SPIRV module or native binary defining a set of SYCL
kernels and/or device functions.

## Data structure of cache
The cache is split into two levels:
 - in-memory cache which is used during application runtime for device code
 which has been already loaded and built for target device.
 - on-disk cache which is used to store device binaries between application
 executions.

### In-memory cache
The cache stores underlying PI objects behind `cl::sycl::program` and
`cl::sycl::kernel` user-level objects in a per-context data storage. The storage
consists of two maps: one is for programs and the other is for kernels.

> The programs map's key consists of four components: kernel set id<sup>[1](#what-is-ksid)</sup>,

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we can draw a clear connection to the structures used by AOT here: https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/2b521f3ec1b6c9f98f60f195b3823d6f70cf3741/sycl/include/CL/sycl/detail/pi.h#L681

specialized constants, device this program is built for, build options id <sup>[2](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.

The kernels map's key consists of four components too: program the kernel
belongs to, kernel name<sup>[3](#what-is-kname)</sup>, device the program is

> built for, build options id<sup>[2](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.

Reviewer: Seems to me that both the device and build options components are redundant here, since those are associated with the program which is already a component of the key by itself. Am I missing something here?

<a name="what-is-ksid">1</a>: Kernel set id is an ordinal number of the device
binary image the kernel is contained in.
<a name="what-is-bopts">2</a>: Hash for the string representation of build
options set in application or environment variables (e.g.

> SYCL_PROGRAM_COMPILE_OPTIONS, SYCL_PROGRAM_LINK_OPTIONS). The key is hash out

Reviewer 3: AFAIK there can be options stored in the device image.

Author: Options from device image was added to the doc.

Author: > Also, matching string hashes does not necessarily mean equivalence strings. Why not use the string itself?

The idea of using hashes instead of fill strings (for build options or device id) to get short representation for using on file system (to avoid path overload issue). There is really small chance of hash collision.

Also build options are goin to be sorted to avoid difference when just order is changed,

of the string which is concatenation of `program.get_compile_options()`,
`program.get_link_options()`, `program.get_build_options()` values.
<a name="what-is-kname">3</a>: Kernel name is a kernel ID mangled class' name
which is provided to methods of `cl::sycl::handler` (e.g. `parallel_for` or
`single_task`).

### On-disk cache
The cache is hidden behind in-memory cache and stores the same underlying PI

> object behind `cl::sycl::program` user-level objects in a per-context data

Reviewer 4: General comment: `sycl::program` is being deprecated, and `sycl::module` will replace it, which has different API. This design should be flexible enough to easily migrate to modules in future. Otherwise it might make sense to implement modules first then the cache.

Author: No difficulties are seen in migration from sycl::program to sycl::kernel_bundle because cache is operating with underlining interfaces which are not going to be changed.

storage.

> The storage consists of the map for storing programs. It uses different keys to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The storage is organized as a map for storing programs. It uses different keys to
```

address difference in SYCL objects ids between applications runs as well as the
fact that the same kernel name can be used in different SYCL applications.

> The programs map's key consists of four components: device image id<sup>[1](#what-is-diid)</sup>,

Reviewer 4: a list of 4 elements (each on separate line) would be clearer for understanding

> specialized constants, device id<sup>[2](#what-is-did)</sup> this program is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
specialization constants values, device id<sup>[2](#what-is-did)</sup> this program is
```

built for, build options id<sup>[3](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.

> <a name="what-is-diid">1</a>: Hash out of  first 10 kB (for performance reasons) of SPIRV image (?and/or source code?) used as input for the build.

Reviewer 4: - again, hash equivalence does not guarantee program code equivalence, the program code itself should be part of the key and the hash can be used for fast bail-out. Maybe binary size would be even faster. Or this should be a multi-map.
- would be good not to limit program code to SPIRV form only - can't it be just opaque binary chunk?

Author: On-disk cache does not make sense for AOT because no JIT compilation happens in this case. I removed SPIRV wording in favor of device kernel image.

Reviewer 5: > would be good not to limit program code to SPIRV form only - can't it be just opaque binary chunk?

Is it possible to have non-SPIRV binary image for JIT? I believe, it's possible for CUDA, though double checking.

Reviewer 4: My point is: if there are benefits in limiting device binary to SPIRV, they need to be identified and analyzed, otherwise, why limit the design?

In order to eliminate this waste of run-time we introduce a kernel and program
caching. The cache is per-context and it caches underlying objects of non
interop kernels and programs.

*Use-case #3.* Rebuild of all programs on SYCL application restart:
JIT compilation for cases when an application contains huge amount of device
code (big kernels or multiple kernels) may take significant time. The kernels and
programs are rebuilt on every program restart. AOT compilation can be used to
avoid that but it ties application to specific backend runtime version(s) and
predefined HW configuration(s). As a general solution it is reasonable to have
program persistent cache which works between application restarts (e.g. cache
on disk for device code built for specific HW/SW configuration).

<a name="what-is-program">1</a>: Here "program" means an internal SYCL runtime
object corresponding to a device code module or native binary defining a set of
SYCL kernels and/or device functions.

## Data structure of cache

> The cache is split into two levels:

Author: I can enumerate caches L1 and L2 but from my perspective referencing as in-memory and persistent cache is more clear. So the is no reason to introduce these labels.

 - options passed through SYCL API.

Note: Backend runtimes used by SYCL can have extra environment or configurations
values (e.g. IGC has [igc_flags.def](https://github.com/intel/intel-graphics-compiler/blob/7f91dd6b9f2ca9c1a8ffddd04fa86461311c4271/IGC/common/igc_flags.def) which affect JIT process). Changing such
configuration will invalidate cache and manual cache cleanup should be done.

<a name="what-is-kname">3</a>: Kernel name is a kernel ID mangled class' name
which is provided to methods of `cl::sycl::handler` (e.g. `parallel_for` or
`single_task`).

### Persistent cache

The cache works behind in-memory cache and stores the same underlying PI
object behind `cl::sycl::program` user-level objects in a per-context data
storage.
The storage is organized as a map for storing device code image. It uses
different keys to address difference in SYCL objects ids between applications
runs as well as the fact that the same kernel name can be used in different
SYCL applications.

The programs map's key consists of four components:
 - device image id<sup>[1](#what-is-diid)</sup>,
 - specialization constants values,
 - device id<sup>[2](#what-is-did)</sup> this program is built for,

>  - build options id<sup>[3](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.

Reviewer 4: The description does not handle situation when for two programs all the above match, but the source binaries they were compiled from differ. Can this be re-formulated to something like:
The cache is organized as a multi-map. Multi-map key includes \<those four fields above\> and source binary size. Matching keys don't guarantee item match, so for each item with matching key SYCL runtime will additionally compare the source binaries, which are kept as a part of the cached item object.

Author: Added description of hash collision case in the paragraph

`info::platform::name`, `info::device::name`, `info::device::version`,
`info::device::driver_version` parameters to differentiate different HW and SW
installed on the same host as well as SW/HW upgrades.

<a name="what-is-bopts">3</a>: Hash for the concatenation of build options (both
compile and link options) set in application or environment variables. There are
three sources of build options:
 - from device image (pi_device_binary_struct::CompileOptions,
 pi_device_binary_struct::LinkOptions);
 - environment variables (SYCL_PROGRAM_COMPILE_OPTIONS,
 SYCL_PROGRAM_LINK_OPTIONS);
 - options passed through SYCL API.
Hashes are used for fast built device image identification and shorten filenames
on disk. To avoid possible collisions cache item on disk contains full key
values and compared with current build request values to ensure matching.
If full values does not match build is done and new item is added to cache.

## Cache configuration

There is set of configuration parameters which can be set as environment variables or parameters in `sycl.conf`  and affect cache behavior:
| Environment variable | Values | Description |
| -------------------- | ------ | ----------- |

> | `SYCL_CACHE_DIR`| Path | Path to persistent cache root directory. Default values are `%AppData%\Intel\dpcpp_program_cache` for Windows and `$HOME/intel/dpcpp_program_cache` on Linux. |

Author: It is ok to use it here as the project is DPC++ (oneAPI Data Parallel C++ compiler).
In any case the directories were renamed to sycl_program_cache to be more general.

| `SYCL_CACHE_ENABLED` | ON, OFF | Switches persistent cache switch  on or off. Default value is ON. |
| `SYCL_CACHE_MAX_SIZE` | Positive integer | Cache eviction is triggered once size of cached images exceeds the value in megabytes (default - 8 192 for 8 GB). Set to 0 to disable size-based cache eviction. |
| `SYCL_CACHE_THRESHOLD` | Positive integer | Cache eviction threshold in days (default value is 7 for 1 week). Set to 0 for disabling time-based cache eviction. |

> | `SYCL_CACHE_MIN_DEVICE_IMAGE_SIZE` | Positive integer | Minimum size of device code image in kilobytes which is reasonable to cache on disk because disk access operation may take more time than do JIT compilation for it. Default value is 0 to disable image caching minimum size. |

Author: rephrased description. All images are cached in this case.

avoid that but it ties application to specific backend runtime version(s) and
predefined HW configuration(s). As a general solution it is reasonable to have
program persistent cache which works between application restarts (e.g. cache
on disk for device code built for specific HW/SW configuration).

<a name="what-is-program">1</a>: Here "program" means an internal SYCL runtime
object corresponding to a device code module or native binary defining a set of
SYCL kernels and/or device functions.

## Data structure of cache

The cache is split into two levels:
 - in-memory cache which is used during application runtime for device code
 which has been already loaded and built for target device.
 - persistent (on-disk) cache which is used to store device binaries between
 application executions.

### In-memory cache

The cache stores underlying PI objects behind `cl::sycl::program` and
`cl::sycl::kernel` user-level objects in a per-context data storage. The storage
consists of two maps: one is for programs and the other is for kernels.

The programs map's key consists of four components:
 - kernel set id<sup>[1](#what-is-ksid)</sup>,
 - specialization constants values,

>  - device this program is built for,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - the device this program is built for,
```

### Persistent cache

The cache works behind in-memory cache and stores the same underlying PI
object behind `cl::sycl::program` user-level objects in a per-context data
storage.
The storage is organized as a map for storing device code image. It uses
different keys to address difference in SYCL objects ids between applications
runs as well as the fact that the same kernel name can be used in different
SYCL applications.

The programs map's key consists of four components:
 - device image id<sup>[1](#what-is-diid)</sup>,
 - specialization constants values,
 - device id<sup>[2](#what-is-did)</sup> this program is built for,
 - build options id<sup>[3](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.

Hashes are used for fast built device image identification and shorten
filenames on disk. Once cache directory on disc is identified (see
[Persistent cache storage structure](#persistent-cache-storage-structure)
for detailed directory structure) full key values are compared with the ones
stored on disk (in every <n>.src file located in the cache item directory):
 - if they match the built image is loaded from correspoding <n>.bin file;
 - otherwise image build is done and new cache item is created on disk

> containing 2 files: <max_n+1>.src for key values and <max_n+1.bin> for

Reviewer 5: NIT: `<max_n+1>.src` and `<max_n+1.bin>` should be aligned.

can be used to avoid that but it ties application to specific backend runtime
version(s) and predefined HW configuration(s). As general solution it is
reasonable to have kernel/program cache which works between application
restarts (e.g. cache on disk for devices code build for specific HW/SW
configuration).

<a name="what-is-program">1</a>: Here "program" means an internal SYCL runtime
object corresponding to a SPIRV module or native binary defining a set of SYCL
kernels and/or device functions.

## Data structure of cache
The cache is split into two levels:
 -  in-memory cache which is used during application runtime for device code
 which has been already loaded and built for target device.
 - on-disk cache which is used to store device binaries between application
 executions.

### In-memory cache
The cache stores underlying PI objects behind `cl::sycl::program` and
`cl::sycl::kernel` user-level objects in a per-context data storage. The storage
consists of two maps: one is for programs and the other is for kernels.

The programs map's key consists of four components: kernel set id<sup>[1](#what-is-ksid)</sup>,

> specialized constants, device this program is built for, build options id <sup>[2](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.

Author: Now it is 3 components. I plan to extend it to four to take build options in consideration.

> specialized constants, device this program is built for, build options id <sup>[2](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.

Reviewer 5: Should this be split into multiple patches or it's going to be implemented as a single feature?

> specialized constants, device this program is built for, build options id <sup>[2](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.

Author: The feature will be done in several patches. Current plan is:
 - Update in-memory cache
 - Add on-device cache (with unit tests)
 - Add on-device cache cleanup (with unit tests) - optional 
 - Add E2E tests in intel/llvm-test-suite

The kernels map's key consists of four components too: program the kernel
belongs to, kernel name<sup>[3](#what-is-kname)</sup>, device the program is
built for, build options id<sup>[2](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.

<a name="what-is-ksid">1</a>: Kernel set id is an ordinal number of the device
binary image the kernel is contained in.
<a name="what-is-bopts">2</a>: Hash for the string representation of build
options set in application or environment variables (e.g.
SYCL_PROGRAM_COMPILE_OPTIONS, SYCL_PROGRAM_LINK_OPTIONS)
<a name="what-is-kname">3</a>: Kernel name is a kernel ID mangled class' name
which is provided to methods of `cl::sycl::handler` (e.g. `parallel_for` or
`single_task`).

### On-disk cache

> The cache is hidden behind in-memory cache and stores the same underlying PI

Author: It should be transparent for SYCL application.

object behind `cl::sycl::program` user-level objects in a per-context data
storage.
The storage consists of the map for storing programs. It uses different keys to
address difference in SYCL objects ids between applications runs as well as the
fact that the same kernel name can be used in different SYCL applications.

The programs map's key consists of four components: device image id<sup>[1](#what-is-diid)</sup>,
specialized constants, device id<sup>[2](#what-is-did)</sup> this program is
built for, build options id<sup>[3](#what-is-bopts)</sup>.
<a name="what-is-diid">1</a>: Hash out of  first 10 kB (for performance reasons) of SPIRV image (?and/or source code?) used as input for the build.
<a name="what-is-did">2</a>: Hash out of the string which is concatenation of values for
`info::platform::name`, `info::device::name`, `info::device::version`,
`info::device::driver_version` parameters to differentiate different HW and SW
installed on the same host as well as SW/HW upgrades.

## Environment variables
The following environment variables affect cache mechanism:

> `DPCPP_CACHE_DIR`=/path/to/cache/location

Reviewer 5: Is there a default value for the case when the variable isn't set but `DPCPP_CACHE_ENABLED` is set?

Author: it planned to be. I have added to the doc.

`DPCPP_CACHE_ENABLED`=switching on-disc cache ON/OFF (default value is ON to expose possible issue ASAP, may be switch to OFF before the release)

> `DPCPP_CACHE_THRESHOLD`=cache clean up threshold (TBD: cleanup strategy)

Reviewer 5: Does `TBD` (to be discussed) mean that it's not stated in the document or that it's discussed in chapter named `cleanup strategy`?

Author: TBD stands for to be defined. It is going to be added soon. Together with cleanup strategy section

> `DPCPP_CACHE_MIN_KERNEL_SIZE`=min size of kernel which is reasonable to cache on

Reviewer 5: What is kernel size? How is that calculated?

Author: It is should be program image size in bytes. Rename variables and update description to be more straightforward.

Caching isn't done:
 - when program is built out of source with `program::build_with_source()` or
   `program::compile_with_source()` method;

>  - when program is a result of linking multiple programs (?to be changed if possible?).

Reviewer 5: Should it be marked with TBD?

Author: done

`BuildResult` and are cached. The `BuildResult` structure is specialized with
either `PiKernel` or `PiProgram`<sup>[1](#remove-pointer)</sup>.

### Inter-process safety
For on-disc cache there might be access collisions for accessing the same file
from different instance of SYCL applications:
- write collision happens when 2 instances of the same application are started
to write to the same cache file;
- read collision may happen if one application is writing to the file and the
other instance of the application is trying to read from it while write
operation is not finished.
To avoid collisions the file in on-disc cache are locked for read-write access

> until write operation is finished.

Reviewer 5: Should the process lock the whole cache directory explicitly? For example, in the same way as `apt-get` does it.

Author: I will learn what is pros and cons for locking whole directory and provide an update in next revision of the doc.

for reference of proper mapping is returned by Acquire function. The use of this
class implements RAII to make code look cleaner a bit. Now, GetCache function
will return the mapping to be employed that includes the 3 components: kernel

> name, device as well as any specialization constants values. These get added to

Author: SpecIDs are also there but only for where the value to apply.

`BuildResult` structure also contains synchronization objects: mutex and
condition variable. We employ them to signal waiting threads that the build
process for this kernel/program is finished (either successfully or with a
failure).

<a name="remove-pointer">1</a>: The use of `std::remove_pointer` was omitted for
the sake of simplicity here.

> <a name="exception-data">2</a> Advisory locks work only when a process

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
<a name="advisory-lock">2</a> Advisory locks work only when a process
```

Author: applied

its message and error code.

### Persistent cache storage structure

The device code image are stored on file system using structure below:
```
<cache_root>/
	<device_hash>/
		<device_image_hash>/
			<spec_constants_values_hash>/
				<build_options_hash>/
					<n>.src
					<n>.bin
```
 - `<cache_root>` - root directory storing cache files;
 - `<device_hash>` - hash out of device information used to identify target device;
 - `<device_image_hash>` - hash made out of device image used as input for the JIT compilation;
 - `<spec_constants_values_hash>` - hash for specialization constants values;
 - `<build_options_hash>` - hash for all build options;
 - `<n>` - sequential number of hash collisions. When hashes matches for the specific build but full values don't, new cache item is added with incremented value (enumeration started from 0).

Two files per cache item are stored on disk:
 - `<n>.src` contains full values for build parameters (device information, specialization constant values, build options, device image) which is used to resolve hash collisions and analysis of cached items. 
 - `<n>.bin` contains built device code.

### Inter-process safety

> For on-disc cache there might be access collisions for accessing the same file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For on-disk cache there might be access collisions for accessing the same file
```

until write operation is finished. e.g if new file or directory should be
created/deleted parent directory is locked, file is created in locked state,
then the directory and the file are unlocked.

To address cases with high lock rate (multiple copies of the SYCL applications
are run in parallel and use the same cache directory) nested directories
representing cache keys are used to minimize locks down to applications which
build the same device with the same parameters. Directory is locked for minimum
time because it can be unlocked once subdirectory is created. If file is created in
directory the directory should be locked until file creation done.

Advisory locking <sup>[1](#advisory-lock)</sup> is used to ensure that the
user/OS tools are able to manage files.

<a name="advisory-lock">1.</a> Advisory locks work only when a process
explicitly acquires and releases locks, and are ignored if a process is not aware
of locks.

### Cache eviction mechanism

Cache eviction mechanism is required to avoid resources overfloat both for
memory and disk. The general idea is to delete items following LRU (least
recently used) strategy both for in-memory and persistent cache.

> 

Reviewer 4: LRU can be quite tricky to implement for the in-memory case, so I would like to see more detailed design in this doc. Can we add TODO for now?

Author: added TODO

The device code image are stored on file system using structure below:
```
<cache_root>/
	<device_hash>/
		<device_image_hash>/
			<spec_constants_values_hash>/
				<build_options_hash>/
					<n>.src
					<n>.bin
```
 - `<cache_root>` - root directory storing cache files;
 - `<device_hash>` - hash out of device information used to identify target device;
 - `<device_image_hash>` - hash made out of device image used as input for the JIT compilation;
 - `<spec_constants_values_hash>` - hash for specialization constants values;
 - `<build_options_hash>` - hash for all build options;
 - `<n>` - sequential number of hash collisions. When hashes matches for the specific build but full values don't, new cache item is added with incremented value (enumeration started from 0).

Two files per cache item are stored on disk:
 - `<n>.src` contains full values for build parameters (device information, specialization constant values, build options, device image) which is used to resolve hash collisions and analysis of cached items. 
 - `<n>.bin` contains built device code.

### Inter-process safety

For on-disc cache there might be access collisions for accessing the same file

> from different instance of SYCL applications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from different instances of SYCL applications:
```

- write collision happens when 2 instances of the same application are started
to write to the same cache file/directory;
- read collision may happen if one application is writing to the file and the
other instance of the application is trying to read from it while write
operation is not finished.

To avoid collisions the file system entries are locked for read-write access
until write operation is finished. e.g if new file or directory should be
created/deleted parent directory is locked, file is created in locked state,
then the directory and the file are unlocked.

To address cases with high lock rate (multiple copies of the SYCL applications
are run in parallel and use the same cache directory) nested directories
representing cache keys are used to minimize locks down to applications which
build the same device with the same parameters. Directory is locked for minimum
time because it can be unlocked once subdirectory is created. If file is created in

> directory the directory should be locked until file creation done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a directory, the directory should be locked until file creation is done.
```

Advisory locking <sup>[1](#advisory-lock)</sup> is used to ensure that the
user/OS tools are able to manage files.

<a name="advisory-lock">1.</a> Advisory locks work only when a process
explicitly acquires and releases locks, and are ignored if a process is not aware
of locks.

### Cache eviction mechanism

Cache eviction mechanism is required to avoid resources overfloat both for
memory and disk. The general idea is to delete items following cache size or
LRU (least recently used) strategy both for in-memory and persistent cache.

#### In-memory cache eviction

> It is initiated on program/kernel maps access/add item operation. Then cache

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is initiated on program/kernel maps access/add item operation. When cache
```

size exceeds storage threshold the items which are least recently used are
deleted.
TODO: add detailed description of in-memory cache eviction mechanism.

#### Persistent cache eviction

> Persistent cache eviction is going to be applied basing on file last access (read/write) date (access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Persistent cache eviction is going to be applied based on file last access (read/write) date (access
```

time). On SYCL application shutdown phase cache eviction process is initiated

> which walk through cache directories and check:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which walks through cache directories as follows:
```
